Good morning-
Good morning
... everybody. It's very good to have you here.
Karen Osborne,
Hayden Waino and Dr. Barbara Disley.
I'll let you introduce yourselves as well, but I understand we have you here for
two hours today.
I'll let you open up with some introductory remarks after introduction, and then
I'll have the two members to ask questions. Over to you.
Thank you for making the time.
Thank you. Tēnā koe, e te tiamana, koutou nga mangai o
te komiti nei. Me ana ra i roto nga tini
āhuatanga o te wā. Thank you again for the opportunity to
allow us to present our last year's work and
perhaps a look
into what we're looking into in the future.
As many of you will know that we were set up
following the inquiry into mental health and addiction back in
2018, and we came into form in February
'21.
So,
six years
of existence.
At the time, the commission was set up to be a force for change, helping to lead a
shift
to a mental health wellbeing system that is accountable
and is experienced as joined up, respectful, responsive by tāngata
whai ora,
their families, and whānau.
The system is serving a population now that is poorer in mental
health and wellbeing, an increasing need for mental health support
compared to six years ago.
There have been improvements. More staff in place due to filling vacancies
has been a key driver to improve access rates and reduce wait times.
Over 236,000 people have seen the
Access and Choice program in 2024, but less than the
expected target of 325,000 per
annum. However, for young people,
access to specialist mental health services reduced.
They faced longer wait times, had more referrals declined.
This is particularly concerning given the rate of psychological distress
that is increasing for young people.
In 2024 and '25
was the coming of age for Te Hiranga Mahara.
Our system performance monitor showed a system view linking outcomes
for people with contributions
from the government.
Our first system performance monitoring report outlined what a good mental health
and addiction system looks like.
The report shows that while there are pockets of positive change,
there is a significant way to go to achieve the outcomes people expect.
Our annual stakeholder engagement survey told us there is an overall
positive perception of Te Hiranga Mahara.
Stakeholders rated us highly on our engagement,
reliability of advice, reports, and information that we
publish, and speaking up on important mental health, addiction, and
wellbeing issues.
Māori,
iwi, and lived experience stakeholders report positive engagement with
us.
We can see the impact of our work in three key areas:
the Access and Choice program,
the work to repeal and replace the Mental Health Act,
and the new Mental Health and Wellbeing Strategy.
The launch of the Access and Choice program represented a major
investment in mental health and addiction.
Our monitoring has provided transparency and accountability.
In response to our findings, we saw greater investment in targeted
action and improvement in data quality and
visibility.
Since our establishment, we've advocated for a mental health and addiction
system that places people and whānau at the center.
Central to this has been our support for the work to repeal and replace the
Mental Health Act.
We support legislative and practice changes that uphold
people's rights to make informed decisions about their care and
treatment.
We've advocated for stronger recognition of mental health and wellbeing
within legislation.
Our evidence-based advice made the case for a dedicated mental health
and wellbeing strategy anchored in research and shaped by the voices of
people with lived experience.
Our engagement has been acknowledged and actively sought with the
Minister for Mental Health supporting our ongoing involvement in the
development of the Mental Health and Wellbeing Strategy.
In the coming year ahead,
as our 25/26 is our first year under our
new strategy
and statement of intent.
We have new strategic priorities focused on mental health and addiction services
for tāngata whai ora
and outcomes for people with lived experience,
and on improving the performance of the mental health and addiction system.
We're focusing our efforts over the next three years through making
three strategic shifts on how we work,
placing people with lived experience at the center of our work,
being future-oriented, promoting alignment and leveraging
knowledge to influence positive change,
and being a bold advocate.
The first Hauora Heringa Ro Te Ara Tūroa forum was
a success with over 240 attendees.
Feedback was positive, particularly about the timely announcement
regarding crisis response funding.
Most delegates surveyed found the program relevant, topical and
useful.
The publication of Urupare Morerere Crisis
Response Monitoring
Report was a significant milestoneAnalysis
of media cover showed 23 articles across major outlets in an
estimated reach of 2.8 million impressions.
We published the assessment of progress implementation of Ko Tima Te
Haringa recommendations.
This is the first time that we have assessed progress with recommendations
that we've made.
Of the five recommendations made in early 2024, three have
been completed by Health New Zealand and the government.
Two others are being worked on.
This year, in 2026, the Minister for Mental Health will
undertake a review of our effectiveness that was built into the legislation from
the beginning and the operations of Te Hiringa Māhara.
Our case studies highlight the system is shifting.
We are a trusted voice in speaking up on important health and mental health,
addiction, and wellbeing issues.
We recognize much more needs to be done and will take time,
sustained leadership, and action.
The new mental health and wellbeing strategy and our ongoing oversight,
monitoring, and advocacy will be critical to seeing the change
people and whanau want to see. Tena koutou.
Thank you. Thanks very much for that.
Some questions. Ingrid Lari.
Yeah. Thank you very much, and lovely to see you all.
I'm interested to pick up some of the themes that you mentioned
in your introduction, and
clear that,
when you say a trusted voice, that certainly is the perceptions in the sector.
So I'm curious to know some things from a systems perspective that
your commission has highlighted.
One of the things we asked you about a number of years ago was
leadership in the mental health sector, and I'm wanting to get a sense from you
whether
you feel that the leadership is there.
And I'm thinking also about accountability, given that we have more agencies
who
are supposed to or have a statutory duty to provide some accountability.
But when we ask them all, fingers go the other way, or there
just isn't the legislative teeth.
And in fact, when I look, I see accountability's only really at a contracted
level, which are very output-orientated.
So there's two systems levels questions there. One is, is the leadership there?
Secondly, are you satisfied that the accountabilities are baked into the system in
the way they should be around mental health?
Let me start. I think we can all probably have a bit of a go at that question.
It's a big one, Ingrid. So,
in terms of leadership, we've seen some change and
improvement, particularly within Health New Zealand.
And we've been able to actively engage
at the governance and senior
operational level. So we've seen
a deficit, I suppose, of leadership in that space that has been being filled in
recent times.
In terms of
accountability, I think there's still ways to go.
We think that the mental health and wellbeing strategy is an important one, that
it has an overlay that includes within it
milestones and accountabilities that you refer
to.
I can give one example of where system
change leadership where we particularly played a
role, and that's in the crisis response space.
There was a lack of clear leadership across the various different agencies,
police, justice, and health,
and we managed to fill a void. And I think that as a result of that, there was some
progress made, and then government subsequently making some investments.
So, change is happening in pockets, but I would still
say in terms of overall accountability in a joined up system, we have a
long way to go. And as I said in that introduction, it's going to require time and
sustained leadership for us to get there.
That's a starter. Or Karen.
Could I sleep on that, Mr. Chair?
Of course you can.
Thank you for that. And I guess that leads me into
a pivot, if you like, or a focus now on youth.
And I know that in your latest report, we're still seeing
youth having longer wait times to access specialist services.
And in fact, we're seeing longer wait times for addiction services as well.
So I'm interested to know whether the focus on youth is--
whether you're able, within the current architecture, to include some of the really
important things like social determinants and other elements that might
make a significant difference to lifting that access and engagement.
I think there's two parts to your question.
In terms of the first part of your
question...
Yes. Sure thing.
Just sorry, can you
clarify that first part?
So the first part is around the wait times for-
Yes. Sorry. Wait times
... 19 to 24-year-olds.
So if we're unpicking it, I think is probably the best
one-line statement we can say.
What we're finding in for young people is the referrals are being made, but they're
being declined, and so understanding what that's about is
important to us.
Is that work happening? Do you know the tracking of the declines?
Karen.
Yeah. Okay, I can comment on that. So we've had a long-term focus on
rangatahi and young people, looking at both what are the drivers
for the increasing rates of distress, in that sort of determinant
space. And we reported on the wellbeing outcomes for rangatahi and youth,
as well as access to services. So both is really important.
You've seen youth reflected in our crisis and other
work, and we are doing a deep dive this year to really try and
understand those pathways across the system, but
also the access patterns. So what we have seen is, as Hayden said,
a continued decline in the numbers of young people accessing specialist
services. And there are more options in primary and community, but we're
still hearing a lot about the concerns that people have about young people not
being able to get access when they need it.
So we need to understand how that whole system's working.
Yeah, I'll just leave it there.
She's on, she-
Yeah.
Oh, yeah. But I want a sup on the second round.
Thank you.
Before a sup, and then it's Kahu.
Yeah, just final sup. Thank you for that.
Last night when I asked the minister about this, he said that
people are being referred to different organizations or different specialists, and
that's why there are these declines.
Have you seen evidence that young people are actually being deferred
into services and receiving the treatment, or is that a statement that
needs some evidence behind it?
Yeah. Look, we have heard that
referrals are being declined because there's more appropriate
services, and we know there are more options in those primary and
community services, particularly like the youth stream of
access and choice and other options.
We don't fully understand the detail that sits behind that,
which is what we're hoping to understand more in the deep dive that we're doing
this year.
So there is something happening in terms of that 18 to 24
age group who are accessing adult services.
So wanting to understand what's happening within services and
why young people, that age group, has continued to decline while adults
has increased. So there is something under there that we need to understand,
so we're looking at it.
Which is what my sup was going to be about, is that transition from youth to
adult and
being able to understand what is the gap or the blockage
in that transition. If you have any comment on that.
Yeah. Look, we haven't particularly looked at
that transition, and so that is part of the work we're doing this year,
as part of the deep dive, looking at young people and how
that transition works. Because we have heard many...
Young people are all different, and so for some, they may be more ready to
transition into adult services. Others might prefer to
actually be continued to be supported in the services they're currently
receiving. So as I said, that's what we're looking at this year.
Right. So you're going to look at that to understand what that
blockage or-
Yes.
Mm.
Yes. And so in our work, what we do is we have the broad brush approach to
monitoring, and then we highlight the areas where we need to have a closer look.
And last year, it was really clear that crisis responses was an area we
needed to have a closer look.
Yeah.
So we did that deep dive last year. This year, it's really having a
look at those youth services.
And that's how we work as an entity, is to say, "Where do we need to have a closer
look?" And do that work.
So that there's a gap in that transition bit at the moment.
Yeah.
That's what we need to understand more.
Great.
Yeah. And that's where we add as value to the system, is being able to look at
those deep dives,
bring some international evidence, what is working well in New Zealand,
what can we learn across the system. So that's what we're doing.
I-
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for being here and for your mahi.
No.
We know that our rangatahi have some of the worst statistics for mental
health
in the OECD, and I want to talk about
your advocacy role, particularly with other ministries and
ministers. So we know that the new
Minister Stanford's new curriculum,
particularly the health and physical education curriculum, does not
mention the words mental health at all.
How have you advocated to the minister or the Ministry for
Education to have mental health within the curriculum?
Yeah. We haven't had any specific advocacy
to the minister. When we have those relationships across
government, and certainly we know that other government entities,
agencies, draw from our work, and so we
certainly advocate for youth voice, so for young people to have a voice,
in whatever changes are being proposed.
But also for young people to have greater knowledge about
mental health and wellbeing, what they can do to keep themselves well
and safe. So yeah, we certainly advocate for that.
Thank you. Supplementary.
And so do you think it is vital for
youth and rangatahi to get support, information, and understanding through their
education
at school?
Yeah. Look, this is a personal response. Yes.
Have we done any particular work in a specific area?
We haven't.
And supplementary. And so has the Ministry for Education or
the Minister of Education reached out to you for that advice?
I'm not aware of that.
Thank you. And one more,
if that's okay.
It's okay.
Thank you.
So polite. Has there been any discussion
around or thoughts around having a cross-ministry
group that meets, like the group that was set up after
Te Aorerekura for the prevention of family and sexual
violence was set up, where they came together, talked
about mental health, particularly around youth,
for this case. Has there been any work or thoughts done
around that?
With the focus on education and wellbeing?
With a focus on youth mental health.
Not that I'm aware of. Yeah.
Do you think that-
We've-
Yeah.
The closest piece of work that we've been involved in there would be in the
crisis response space.
Mm.
And there have been some
short-term ministry-led initiatives, but not specifically on this
kaupapa.
Mm.
There has been work across government in previous
terms of government with drawing together different
ministers with different portfolios to focus on
the child and youth wellbeing. Yeah.
Thank you.
Hamish.
Yes, sir. Bring it. Thank you.
During the year, you've updated your strategy.
What is the main shifts in your priorities, and what are they based on?
Good question.
I think a number of factors
came to play. I'll start the ball rolling, but a number of factors came to
play for us. One,
we
found our straps, I suppose you could say, being a startup 60 years
ago. So we were clear about what our purpose was, and
we were clear about the resources that we had.
The other part, of course, is that we utilized the public service to assist us
in engaging with stakeholders. So we
listened to a lot of people,
in effect, and helped shape our strategy.
So knowing what we were about, knowing the resources that we had, knowing what
we heard, and that brought us into identifying
six areas to shift where from to.
And I think I'm going to ask Karen just to cover off on those three
areas, but they're quite important for us in terms of driving the
decisions that we make at the board table and elsewhere inside the organization.
So last year, we did undertake what's called a future excellence horizon, which is
common across government. So we
interviewed a range of stakeholders and also
conducted a survey to get feedback from people about if we were the best
organization we could be, what that would look like.
And so what we heard was that we needed to place people's
lived experience much more centered in our work.
We needed to work to improve a fragmented system.
So we'd heard a lot about the fragmentation and the lack of leadership.
We needed to lift our profile, so we heard quite a lot about our visibility,
and that we needed to look ahead and think about the demographic changes that were
happening. And so that then led into the refocus
of our strategy, and our 24/25 annual
report reports against our previous four strategic priorities.
So what we're now working to is a refined
set of strategic priorities, which is about focusing on
people with lived experience, people who are using mental health and addiction
services,
so much more focused on services.
Continuing to have a focus on broader wellbeing outcomes and
determinants. And the new one is really how we look at the performance
of the mental health and addiction system.
And, as we've mentioned previously, we did release our first
system performance report last year.
We are about to release our second one this year in
June, and that is where the six shifts that we identified.
So we said that the system needs to shift in these ways,
and that's really informed the mental health and wellbeing strategy.
So, happy to take further questions on that.
Just a quick set. In multiple of your
answers, you've talked about your stakeholders.
Who do you see your stakeholders? Who do you see those people or
stakeholders? Who are they?
Oh, look, they're really broad.
We have multiple stakeholders. So of course, it's people who have lived
experience and the whanau, families who support them,
and that's a really broad and diverse group.
We have obligations to Maori and whanau as part of
our
legislation and how we engage with Maori and whanau and prioritize
equity for Maori. We have some really important sector stakeholders,
so working with people who are providing services, commissioning
services to achieve the changes that we want to see
across government. We also have
stakeholders in terms of what we describe as the priority populations.
So in our act, there are a list of 12 populations
who have a higher prevalence of distress,
and so it's important that we connect with those groups as well.
So Maori, Pacific, young people, veterans is the
list. So it's a really broad group, and we're a small entity of around 20
staff. So we have to really think smartly about how we
connect in with
organizations that represent those populations and with the
providers, so both Health New Zealand and NGOs, other
providers. So it's a big challenge for us, how we keep that
connection.
I appreciate you've got your priority
populations, and I think last year when you were here, I did ask
about middle-aged males.
Yes.
They're the group that are most likely to die
by suicide. What are you doing to reach out to
stakeholders in that group?
Yeah. So-
Because I suppose one of my fears is that some of these people aren't
accessing mental health support.
Yeah.
And so probably very hard for you to pick up because they're not
engaging with services.
Yeah. And look, I think that's
the relationships we have with other agencies and
organizations who
are connected with those groups. Because it's hard for
us to have the direct reach into those communities, given the nature of our
organization and our size. So we do have
that intentional engagement with the groups that represent,
so be it the rural sector or if
it's Pacific peoples.
So how do we have those connections?
And then also more broadly, like the Mental Health Foundation and those
organizations.
Yes. And just one quick follow-up.
Yes.
Hayden, during your initial
briefing, you mentioned that case studies show that the system is
shifting. Is that in relation to these priorities, or
were you meaning something different?
I was
referring to the areas that we've seen in the legislation,
the taking up of the
strategy for mental health and wellbeing,
focus on youth, and we're also talking about access and
choice. So those are the areas that we particularlyWhere we've worked on,
where we can see some contribution to where those areas of
work have shifted.
A supp on that.
Definitely.
True.
Move a supp on that.
Yeah. Just to clarify, the system shift you're talking about are
mainly inputs in terms of legislative change and systems
change rather than outcomes, which would take some time to
measure.
Of course.
Thank you.
Yes. Quite right. Yeah.
Right. Carlos.
The supp or primary?
Supplementary.
Why do you have a-
Yes
... supplementary? I've got you down as a primary. You're after Carlos.
You're next. Carlos.
Thank you, Chair. I read your statement of intent
that was published in last year, July.
Mm-hmm.
But I couldn't find anything that talk about the needs of the AFEX community.
In the past five years, the risk of mental health issues
like depression have been significantly increased in
Asian communities.
Mm-hmm.
Do you think this is a serious concern that need more
attention?
Mm-hmm. Yes, we do. We're not
reflecting necessarily all of that work that's been done, but
there's some work that's been done through Karen and the team, and that will,
in time,
surface. But perhaps Karen's in a better position to articulate
the work that we're doing.
Yes.
I mean, if you think it is a very serious concern, why not a single
wording or single strategies have been addressing
the needs of our Asian community?
It probably reflects the fact that we weren't there at that
particular time. But it's not to say...
It's basically saying
we can't get to everything at once.
But having said that, we're now in a position, and we are starting to
move into making connections in that particular area.
So you're trying to tell me that you don't think there's a needs for our
Asian community before?
We knew that.
You knew, but you didn't react.
Well, again, a small organization trying to do the
best that we can in terms of reaching.
If you look at all 12 population groups, they're quite extensive and
require quite
a lot of effort and resource to engage in an appropriate way and follow
through. So,
at that particular time, we clearly weren't in a position to
articulate anything. We are in a better position to do that now.
All right. So what do you think are the main reason affecting the mental health in
our AFEX community? How does the Mental Health and Wellbeing
Commission support a speaker for them?
So, I've had a lot of engagement, particularly with Asian Family
Services, and so we have supported the
summits that Kelly and her team have hosted, both in
Auckland and then the one in
Parliament. And we do look at how we reflect
Asian communities, Asian population in our substantive
reports. So for example, in our access and choice report, we
highlighted the needs for Asian people to have access to those access and choice
services. And in our other reports, we also highlight what
are the needs for Asian people alongside Maori and
Pacific. So we certainly have done work to
connect with
both Asian Family Services and other key leaders from
the Asian community, and to reflect that in our work.
Mr Chair, have you removed the barrier for the Asian
community to access to mental health services?
Have we removed the barrier?
Any barrier.
Oh, I think-
Or you just believe that there's no barrier for any
AFEX groups or Asian communities to access to the
mental health service?
Our role is to highlight what's happening in terms of access
and need, and then to advocate
for that. And
in terms of for the Asian population, we have been reflecting
those needs and doing that advocacy in our work.
And I think this does highlight the challenge, as Hayden said.
There are 12 priority populations, and it's hard to reflect
each of those populations specifically, particularly in a statement of
intent, which is around us as an entity.
Mr Chair. One more.
But in our substantive work, we certainly do everything to bring forward those
voices in our work.
If you
just mentioned that your main function is to advocate
for people or give advices, what advice have you given to the
minister so far to address the needs of our Asian
communities? And also, are you happy with the result
you have been implementing the last 12 months so far?
If not, which areas do you think it needs improve?
We have raised
the issue with the minister. We haven't got a clear pathway forward, but we have
raised it as an important area that needs attention.
And specifically in relation to the access and choice
program and their report at the end of five years.
And we did highlight the need for a service stream that was
specific for the Asian population.
Just a quick comment.
And the minister responded to that in a positive way.
Just a last comment.
Hold on, Carlos.
Yeah, just a quick comment, yeah.
You have a quick comment, and then I'm going to Ingrid for a supp, and Cam also has
a supp.
Just let you know I'm very dis-
No, hold on, Carlos. And then Kahu has her primary.
Oh, sorry. It was a supplementary, not a primary. Thank you.
Quick comment.
Just let you know, I'm very disappointed with the answer you provide today, and I
expect a better outcome in the next 12 months.
Thank you.
Supplementary.
Yeah.
Ingrid Leary.
Thank you for that. Speaking to Dr.
Kelly Feng, it seems that one of the problems is that you don't
know what you don't know when it comes to the Asian-
But mental health issues and gambling in particular.
So first, is that a piece of work that is-- when you talk about the work
that you're doing, Karen, is that what you're looking at?
Because that baseline appears to be missing, and that's probably a big part
of why they don't get funding that I think Dr
Chung is alluding to is not proportionate to the problem.
We can't count it. The second part is with access and choice.
Are you aware that the access and choice solution provided by the government
is not the same as the other strands of access and choice, is
convoluted, and therefore makes it really problematic for Asian communities
to actually access access and choice?
And if so, what would you like to see done about that?
Yeah.
So just on that second part,
I am aware that the solution for the Asian stream
of access and choice is different from the other streams, and that reflects
that those other streams were right from the beginning, and then this is a
solution to improve access. And I know that's, I haven't talked
with Kelly recently, but some aspects of that are quite challenging,
and those do need to be worked through.
I think ultimately it is about people being able to access the services and
supports in a timely way. So it is about the specific streams, and it
is also about the appropriateness of all services for
people who are accessing those services.
The
Asian population is
made up of different types of population, as it is for Pacific peoples
as well. So it is how do we, yeah, as said, have the specific
streams and services that meet everybody's needs in the most appropriate way.
And then, so is it baselining of the how big is the problem, which is the
question, and is difficult if the data is only being collected from
small data sets of who is accessing-
Yes
... and what we're seeing on the ground is a much bigger problem.
Is that a gap in the system, and is that something that you are looking at, or?
Yeah, and that goes to the prevalence study.
Mm-hmm.
So we have advocated for a proper sort of study of the level of
need in communities. And we're really pleased-
Speaking particularly about the Asian community.
Yes. Well, that would include what's the level of need for
Asian communities as well as other communities.
So the youth stream is underway, and that should give us a
really good insight into what is the level of need for
all of those populations, and then how can services be targeted
to meet those needs. And particularly for the youth does pick up,
that's part of those changing demographics.
So, you see that particularly in that age group.
So that will give us some really useful information.
But not only us, for the whole system.
So we have a role to play-
Mm-hmm
... but we're not the commissioners and funders of services.
So we're bringing that oversight.
Yeah.
So, we have views and insights, and we can feed those in
with.
I think you can say that we are increasing our presence in this area, and
you will see more from us.
Thank you.
Karen.
Oh, thank you, Chair.
Supplementary.
Cheers.
I heard there's a supplementary then you ask for your primary.
The questions that we've had in this
line of question, we have focused on groups of people,
specifically. Heard some
strong advocacy and questions from Dr Chung
on Asian,
Dr Campbell on middle-aged men. Do you think that
labeling, listing, categorizing the way it's done in this act, in your
enabling piece of legislation, is actually
making your job harder
when a population is divided up and everyone starts fighting from ?
Do you think that it's actually the amount of trust in what you're able
to do is being impacted because of the
dividing people up and clear breach of a social contract where we all come
together to support each other?
Or do you think politicians are dividing us?
Yeah, look, I think-
Like, is it making your job-
I think it's-
... easier or harder?
I think it's helpful-
Speaking to the-
... to be-
... base
I think if we're looking at it from
a general how we apply out the resources that we have,
it gives us, it recognizes that not one shoe
or one solution fits all.
But it does provide a challenge for us when it comes to applying that, and
practically,
there are some challenges for us to be able to move effectively across all
of those bases.
Is that because there's contradictions in the act between things like,
I think it's Section 10, where you can, as a commission, can decide
populations you want to focus on, but then also you've got Clause
13, Schedule 2 with these lists of populations you have to
justify,
actually looking at wider population bases.
I
guess I'm trying to figure out, like, we've heard some emotion.
I would say there's a lot of people who would read this legislation, and yeah, you
could say it's a politician, and say, are you actually able to
look at the population and identify,
based on
what you find or do you feel directed by this to these
population bases?
Mm-hmm. If I could add a comment, because it is one of the shifts that we've made
in our strategy. So when we started in the early
period of time, we did do a report focused on the wellbeing outcomes
for Pacific peoples, to focus on a particular population
group. Now, that report was incredibly well-received by the Pacific
community. But when we've looked at our resources,
and as I said, we're $5 million and 20 staff,
and what we went through with the future excellence horizon, the advice
was that we needed to be much more focused on people with lived experience and
people who are accessing services
And so we have made a shift to, and it was a
challenging shift for us to make, because we would like to be able to
do a report like that on each of the priority populations,
but we simply don't have the resources to enable us to do that.
So we have focused on the people who are accessing
services, who are using services, and the people with distress, and
trying to bring the voices of those different priority populations into
that work. So it is hard to disaggregate because it's not that
people can
be categorized into more than one of
those categories. So it's not just a straight distinction.
So it is a challenge for us that we've had to grapple with.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, we know too many Asian people in Aotearoa don't feel welcome
and have
ill mental health. And
my colleague from the National Party, Dr.
Carlos Cheng,
talked about the need for culturally appropriate services and getting
support to populations
who are disproportionately affected.
For example, people living in rural areas, like farmers.
Mm-hmm.
When we're talking about Asian family services, it could look from
the outside like they get quite a lot of funding
compared to other
services. But we know that that funding is
ring-fenced for gambling,
and that means that other
mental health services,
which maybe are more needed in different areas, are
not able to be funded because it is ring-fenced for gambling.
And so my question is around that access and
peer support, and
what are your suggestions for more flexible contracts
and reactive contracts for the
need?
What's your advice to funders of mental health services?
Yeah, look, generally, we see a lot of our
advice
that we provide
is aimed at policymakers and decision-makers, and
we think the levers of commissioning are really important levers for
change. So we don't have our hand directly on those levers, but what
we can do is shine a light by bringing information
to
bear so that hopefully that influences in a positive way.
And I think that's important that we're not seen as the fixers of issues,
because that's just not what we're designed to do.
So, commissioning is a really important area for change,
as I've said, and I think the kinds of things that you're looking
for usually, particularly if you want community-based
responses, is high trust,
flexibility in tenure or term,
being clear on
the expectation and clear on the outcome that you're looking for,
really clear steps and measures that are put in place,
and allowing that community to determine the best way.
So, using that tight-loose type principle,
being clear on what you're looking for, being clear on what you're measuring, and
allowing that community to shape what the response needs to be.
Can I just make another comment there?
That in terms of the way we are looking at data or the systems
looking at data,
in terms of being clearer about the
impact across different ethnicities, age
groups, other factors that might
play into this space, that's really
important to allow us to be able to look down
into those various variables about
what are the presenting needs, what's the difference being made,
what are the things that would make a difference for particular
populations or age groups,
and what might we be doing about it in commissioning space.
And I guess what we're seeing is a higher
level of focus on some of those different
categories, which may not have been there in the past, but does
allow greater information. And so as access and
choice and those community programs roll out, we're in a better
position now to see who's getting access and who isn't,
and what might need to be done about that.
And I think that's the area we'll be in in the next few years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'd like to ask some questions which are intended
to get from you
a model for me to better understand your
and other mental health data in the future.
Mm-hmm.
I notice that your
letter of expectation includes analysis of current resourcing
against population needs
to inform future areas of focus at a system level.
Often, when we talk about health service planning, we have a conceptual
model
of how we might measure need in the community,
and therefore the service response.
When we read reports
like the one you recently published,
22.9% of people aged 15 to 24
experience high or very high levels of
psychological distress.
Can you please explain the conceptual model that sits
behind that measurement? Or tell me another measurement, but
the measurement of need and what the
services could or should be. How do you link that?
Do you want to-
Look, yeah
So what we've used in terms of that
22.9% is using the health survey results.
So that,
as you know, has limitations. So
that's been used as a proxy to say
what's the best information we have about
the level of need. But
the prevalence study will give us far
better information about the actual level of need and prevalence of-
Okay. I don't want to get into a discussion about, Mr.
Deputy Chair, if I may. I don't want to get a discussion
about
measurement and methods.
What I'm asking is, whatever good measurement you
use-
Yeah
... how will you match that or link it to
service need?
Does every person who reports experiencing distress
need a clinical service
or not? And can you explain that link to me?
So what I would say is our work is,
in terms of
that system performance view, and I'll refer
back to the system performance work, is we had our first report last
year, and it might not be the one that you're referring to, but we're
trying to say what are the population level outcomes
for the
well-being for all people in Aotearoa, and how do you then
draw connections back into the system and into the
service contribution? And there's not that
direct connection through. But what we're trying,
in terms of attribution, there's many other factors that sit
outside of the mental health system,
financial crisis,
wars, all of those things actually influence
people's mental health and wellbeing.
So we're trying to draw that connection.
But the report from last year was year one.
And that work will develop over time, but it's trying to
develop those insights and knowledge about
where we need to do more work and to start to paint the picture.
So I
think I understand where you're trying to go with that, but
we've got a long way to get to before we can really say what is the level
of need and what is the appropriate response, be it in
an all of government type approach in terms of improving education,
employment-
Support services
... or is it about what are the services, because it's not
everybody needs a service.
Yeah.
In that way, it could be more
preventative actions, some of the wellbeing service supports that can be provided.
Interesting.
So that's the complexity of what we're trying to
understand.
So let's stay on the service provision
side because that
is an issue that, as members of Parliament and yourselves,
will hear all the time from people who are struggling to access
services. So certainly there's a desire in all parts of the
system, a recognition that the level of services need to
be
increased. But are you saying
that we don't yet know
the desirable level of service in response to these
need measures in New Zealand or the whole world?
Because I have an idea of the level of
obstetric services that New Zealand women need,
and we could link that to the fertility rate or whatever-
Yes
... and therefore plan health services around them.
Similar with this committee has gone through a process with aged care.
So that conceptual model of how to
link measures of need to services doesn't
ex... Can you help me understand? Because it seems like a major problem for
planning health services.
I would agree with you, and I think that's really why we've been really
pushing as an advocate for the epi studies.
And if you look back, youth has never been identified
in any of our, as far as I'm aware.
Okay.
We haven't done anything since 2006 to update
what actual need is. And so I think our view is that
commissioners and planners are flying in the blind, and so information and good
quality and timely information is an issue.
Well,
having
my background in epidemiology, I'm not going to argue against a study being done.
Yeah.
But when a study is done-
Mm-hmm
... you then need to decide what to do with the result.
Yep.
And let's say you find something similar to this
22.9% of the 15 to 24-year-olds, which by the way
came from your-
Mm-hmm
... strategy, figure three in your strategy,
experience distress. So we might well get a number that's better or
worse in some subgroups for-
Mm-hmm
... their level of mental distress and-
... no matter how good our epi study, we still wouldn't know what to do if we don't
have a model that says all of these people need to see a
specialist or-
Mm-hmm
... these people need access, community-based services.
What it's-
Well, obviously there's an interpretation and an analysis and
prioritization process that sits behind
how you decide to
put into operations the kinds of levels of services you would want based on what
you've
both found from the information you've received and the analysis of it.
Seems to be quite a challenge, and of course we could just decide to
pick, "Oh well, here's a very troublesome area." That's
how political process for allocating health resources might
work. "Here's a very challenging area.
Let's put funding there." But-
Mm-hmm
...
do you think we need a working draft of a model
in the absence ofOf
one that comes to mind to give a sense
that here's a reasonable service expectation.
That's helpful.
Because
a lot of us engage in advocacy of different sorts
around health services around this table.
And I am greatly assisted by the idea that,
to use the maternity example again,
every
woman giving birth in New Zealand should have access to
full antenatal, postpartum, and intrapartum care.
That seems to be a very powerful concept for advocating for
services. How are we going to get by without this concept?
I think
without trying to sound political about this, I think a long-term view of
what is important is
part of a,
I'm talking cross-party,
bipartisan approach. Looking long-term, I think is really important
around how those decisions are made.
Because there's obviously, if this is the policy, the decisions that need to be
made, there's an operationalization of those decisions.
I think having some consistency and long-term view about what good could look
like is important. Probably that's as far as I could go.
Possibly.
Those of us who are politicians in the room might feel that those sorts of
agreements are aided by independent advice on what-
Yeah
...
an appropriate level of service provision is.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
I can only... Sorry.
Did you want to make a comment?
Can I make a comment?
Sorry.
I would like to hear from Barbara.
I've been around a long time, as some of you will know.
And the time that I felt we
began to get a bit of a grip was when there was the Mental Health Blueprint,
and that was really rough and ready when I look back now.
But it was really around at the time, looking at what was the
best guess in terms of epidemiology,
getting people in a room who knew what the impacts were
because they either had experience, or they were clinicians, or they were
family. And really starting to think
long-term about what are the components of a system that need
to be there, and what do people need over the
course of episodes of illness to really support them where
they are through to a space and place.
And then to be able to conceptualize what that
is, what it's going to cost, and what you need to do
incrementally to begin to build the system
forward.
Thank you.
Over to you,
Sam.
Thank you. And I think there's been a very interesting
discussion about kind of need to what specialist services.
That, of course, is one part of the equation.
The next part of the equation is the outcomes from the
specialist service, whatever shape they form.
Do we have actually measures to actually indicate that?
Because that would be the final piece of the model.
Yeah. There are measures across the system now that much
more are looking at the clinical outcomes for people
and how the difference that has made, the access and choice
information does take measures on that.
What we probably need to do a lot more and have more systemic
across our system is what do
individuals who experience a service actually think about
it, and to collect much better data on what
they-
Experience
... yes, what they experienced and what might have helped them-
Exactly
... in that whole area. So that's not
collected
universally across our system at all points, although we do
collect
clinical indicators.
Mm-hmm. And I suppose that's kind of going back end
of the model, but actually coming back the other way,
inch.
Yep.
What work is going on in the prevention space?
There is work underway in the
early intervention, prevention space.
Absolutely. So,
trying to understand what are those factors
that are contributing to distress and how some of those could be addressed.
A very topical one is around online safety.
But so how do you understand what those factors are and what can be done
to
prevent the distress occurring? And then when people are
starting to experience distress, how the early intervention
services and supports are available for people, and how people
can keep themselves well. And that is about looking across
the system. There's various agencies have various roles to play
across that part of the system. But certainly, that's an area
where more emphasis needs to be put into what's
available. One of the areas
that needs further work is around digital or
e-mental health. What are the sort of digital tools that are available for
people to support them early? So it is a
lot that is underway, but also further work that needs to happen in that
area. There is more work that could be done or
should be done in the primary and community
areas of service, and that I think frontline staff are reporting.
People are presenting in a much higher acuity when opportunities were lost
further on and
possible intervention occurring earlier.
So yeah, there are actual service gaps in some regions.
Some areas are better. So even just getting the
lumpiness out of the system and more consistency would go some way in terms
of providing people with more choices before becoming
more highly acute.
Mm-hmm.
We do know that the-
The impact in the early years of young people's
lives, the impact of violence, the impact of poverty,
falling out of school early. There is lots and lots of evidence
about the long-term preventative
approaches one can take
in
social, cultural, education domains that really do
make a difference. Removing violence from young people's lives, removing
abuse from young people's lives, giving every child a fair
opportunity are the best preventative
responses that we can take.
Mr. Tur?
We've got to subset and group.
Yeah.
Oh, no, sorry.
No. You've answered it.
Just-
Four months ago.
No, it's all right. Thank you.
Dr. Disley, the blueprint you were referring to-
Mm-hmm
... that's the one published in 1997?
Mm-hmm.
1998.
Wow.
So my question really does pick up on this, and
what I see is perhaps the gap that we've got.
We've talked about the incidents of distress, and distress is at
that end where you're mentioning social determinants, we've mentioned prevention,
and yet when we look at mapping it onto what is being measured,
it is clinical responses. So there is a
gap, isn't there, in terms of how we consider mental health and wellbeing-
Welcome
... or I would say mental and social health, which includes social infrastructure
measurement versus clinical responses.
From a systems level-
Yeah
... does it make sense and is there a role for mental health
to have an insights and data
faculty to be able to inform better policy across
government so that we don't perform in these tyrannies of silo?
Do you?
Yeah. This commission was set up intentionally with that
scope across government.
So we're not solely within the health system, so we certainly have that
reach and our powers to obtain information and to make
recommendations are across government for that very reason.
But we have needed to really focus our
work on the areas that are most
important.
And so that's what we have done, given our
capacity and capability.
Absolutely, and thinking outside of your organization because you have an
independent watchdog role. But from a systems organizational
perspective, will we be able to turn the dial more on prevention if
we're not just looking at clinical, even the articulation of
online safety. We can apply the same logic to housing-
Mm
... to poverty, to all sorts of social
infrastructure. Have we got the approach too
narrow because we're defining the problem very broadly, and then
our focus on outcomes is always from a clinical perspective.
Mm.
How do we reconcile that, and is there an opportunity for us to actually get a
real change in prevention if we were to reorganize?
Yeah. I would say our work, and particularly through our wellbeing outcome
framework-
Yeah
... does focus on those broader outcomes for, wellbeing outcomes for
people. And we have a connection then into our service
level sort of framework. So we are keeping very much
that wider wellbeing view, because there's no question about that.
We're just limited by how much we can do in that space, because
we've had to prioritize to the level we have.
But it's really important to us that we do keep that focus,
and the work that we are doing is about the wellbeing outcomes for people
who are interacting with mental health services-
Mm
...
rather than a broader sort of wellbeing.
If you were resourced more in a different way, you might be able to actually
influence policy that would influence housing outcomes-
Yes
... and mental health outcomes and so on.
Yes.
But that's currently not available because of the scope, correct?
Yeah. And the prioritization decisions we've needed to make-
Yeah
...
to fulfill our legislative mandate and our strategy and
what we've heard from our key stakeholders about what's important.
Thank you.
I'll go to Jenny, and then you've got to come.
Okay.
Jenny.
Thank you.
Influence.
Really keen to understand
when you talk about the position you have to influence, what are some
material gains that you've made that you could
articulate to the committee?
Okay.
Yeah. I'll speak to the ones that are with the case studies we've
highlighted in our annual report.
Mm-hmm.
So we
can say that the mental health and wellbeing strategy,
having a dedicated strategy that informs the work of
all of government is really important.
That's something that we advocated for in the Pae Ora Bill.
It wasn't included at that point in time, but the current Minister of Mental Health
picked that up, and we now have a strategy that's out for consultation.
That's really important to give that sort of focus and direction
and
see the investment behind that as well.
And the-
And what would that investment look like?
Are we talking dollar investment, or are we talking-
Once the strategy is completed, then it's
what sits behind that to make that happen.
The other area of influence would be on the Access and Choice program.
Oh, yeah.
So we've monitored that program with three reports over the course of our five
years. In the first report, we really highlighted the
need to strengthen the focus on the kaupapa Māori, Pacific, and
youth streams of that work, and
we saw a response to that advice. And we've also seen with
our final report, again, the minister has asked for an action
plan to respond to our recommendations to really see
that program reach its full
sort of achieving. We're seeing 325,000 people per annum.
So we can see some areas quite specifically where-Our work
has made a tangible difference. The other case study we highlight in our
annual report is around
the Mental Health Bill, and so the repeal and replace of the Mental Health Bill
that was recommended in He Ara Oranga report of the
inquiry back in 2018. We still haven't seen
that bill come through to fruition.
We think that's a really important area to have focus, that we have got
modern legislation that upholds people's human rights.
There's certainly changes that can be made in practice, but that's another area
that we've had a really sustained focus over the course of our existence.
So would you advocate, and this is just
a supplementary on what my colleague Cameron was asking around the
priority populations, and that you're
focused on those, and then focused on lived experience.
Are you bringing in the rural, the male, in
terms of lived experience, so they become a priority population?
I mean, is everyone not a priority population if you have some mental
health challenges? And I
suppose finally, we want to know, would you suggest removing
those populations so that we don't have a siloed approach
to who's more deserving?
I would say, I mean, we have particular commitments
to Maori and Whanau, which is important, and we have a
legislative function to advocate for the collective interests of people with
lived experience and the people who support them.
So those are really, really important priorities for us in terms of
populations.
The other priority populations are the populations who
are more likely to experience distress, and so what our focus is
on is those people from those populations who
are accessing or wanting to or needing to access services.
So drawing from across those
populations for that particular focus.
But it leaves gaps. It leaves gaps in our community, though, priority populations.
Yes, it does.
And I think that's the kind of...
I'd like to know what you would recommend about how do you deal with those gaps in
population that are of equal need?
And so that's come through our assessment of wellbeing of all people in
Aotearoa, New Zealand,
and how we understand what some of those gaps might
be. I think, as we've talked about, the challenges is
the breadth of and complexity of
those issues in those populations.
And so how, as a small entity, when we're looking at something like our system
performance report, how do we bring those voices through into that report?
So would you be advocating to expand your small entity to make
it a slightly larger entity so you can bring those in?
I mean,
what are you recommending?
Well, as I said before, we've
become comfortable in our skin in knowing what we've got, and
knowing what our purpose is. So I guess what we've done is we've
compromised
on what we might have thought was the potential of the commission from the outset.
So we're working,
by necessity, we've gone back to focusing more
on people with lived experience who are interacting
with services and systems as a priority and looking at priority
groups that might
intersect through that lens, as opposed to those
specific population groups through a population
health lens, if that makes sense. Hopefully.
So what you're saying is you're capturing those groups that are not
priority populations through their lived experience.
Yes.
Can I just sup on that and then have another sup?
What does your data tell you about equity and outcomes for
Maori and other of those prioritized groups in mental health compared to the
general population?
Well, we know Maori experience higher levels of distress
in other indicators, like higher levels of suicide
for young Maori men. And so,
this information is not new to us in the system.
We've known it for some time.
And might that explain why it's the legislative
prioritization?
Well, that comes back to the legislators.
Yeah.
Yep.
My second question is just picking up on the Mental Health Bill, and I know-
This is a primary. We're going to go to Kahu's primary now.
Can I just add an extra-
Well, it was a sup on Jenny's question
I'll come back. Because we keep getting bumped down.
Sure.
Because people jumping in with sups that are...
The first one was well-connected, and then
that's how I'm going to judge it. Kahu.
I think they had just one more thing to add.
Oh, look, I was just going to add a comment in terms of the
higher levels of need. We do see really high levels of need around
Maori and Pacific peoples, and also
for people who experience a disability and members of the rainbow
community. So we are looking at what are some of those groups
that we can see in the information are experiencing poorer wellbeing
outcomes, and then you can look at how are those, where we can,
how are those people then being able to access services and support.
So-
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I just want to talk about service performance and
addressing the wider determinants of health and wellbeing.
We know that young people's long-term wellbeing is intrinsically
linked to their first 2,000 days and the health and
wellbeing of their mama, parents, and wider whanau.
And too many, in fact, thousands of
new mama, new parents, are clinically diagnosed with mental
health disorder
And
that
they are not able to access
services until they are at a critical level in many
cases.
So when we're talking about maternal, perinatal, postnatal
mental health, um,
and how critical it is that
these mama and parents are getting the services that they need.
I've got three
supplementaries, Mr. Chair.
Over.
What monitoring and advocacy are you working on
around that
maternal, peri/postnatal mental health
space?
We haven't got any specific activity in
the maternal mental health area. So,
we have prioritized access more generally,
and then we prioritized crisis responses, um,
and then prioritized, um, having a closer look at rangatahi and young
people, so the sort of deep dive type reports that we do.
There's other areas that we know are really important, um, that we'd
like to have a closer look at.
Addiction services is one. We've had discussions around forensic
services.
Maternal mental health, um, would be one of those on that
list, eating disorders. So there's a number of specific service areas
that
there would be benefit in having a closer look at.
We haven't done that um, to date.
Thank you. And
so we've talked about prevention here.
I'm just wrapping my supplementary from the other one into this question
here. Um, and around that advocacy to
ministers and ministries, um, the prevention is such a huge part
of this and will actually mean that we're not spending as much on
those critical, um,
mental health needs.
And then there'll be more availability, um, hopefully.
Were you consulted or asked for advice from the Minister for Children
or the Minister for Prevention, Family and Sexual Violence around cutting
prevention funding, um, and services?
So for example, women's centers being closed.
No. Not that I'm aware of.
Thank you. Um,
and I guess just to wrap up,
we were looking at your, um, revenue expenses for
'24/25, and they're looking
pretty good, on par there. What are the
implications of your funding that you receive
currently, um, around
what you are able to output and, um, advocate for
around your, um, strategic priorities?
I think we've probably traversed a lot of those constraints
already.
Yeah.
So,
as I say, the strategic refresh that we
undertook last year was in part to recognize
there's the potential scope of what our legislation, um, says
and then the actual resources. And so based on the
experiences of the previous four years, uh, we were making
priority decisions about where we could go with the resources that we've got, which
is why we're prioritizing people with lived
experience, prioritizing, um,
focus on service, um,
experience, and contact. So yeah.
And even within those-
Yeah. And, oh.
Oh, go ahead.
Look, um,
some of the areas that we're particularly constrained is around some of our, um,
lived experience capability, some of our, um,
engagement with
thinking about the sort of priority populations, um, our data and
analytical capability. Um, so there are some areas
that we are particularly constrained, um, and that
has factored into that sort of prioritization of our work.
And so even within those, um, strategic priorities and those
priority populations that you're looking into, if you had more funding, you would
be able to, um, go further in terms of
advocacy, um, and addressing those wider determinants for
mental health.
Mm-hmm.
Yes.
And in that broader wellbeing space, um, absolutely and also
looking at, um, the increasing drug use, um,
and so substance-related harm and addiction
services. That's an area that we've
done some work, but not as much as what is needed.
So there's a number of areas that we've identified that, um,
we believe we could add value to if we were
able to, um, take a closer look at those areas.
Um, we just haven't been able to.
And the work that you've done in, um,
addiction and, um,
drug harm,
what is it showing in terms of its linkage to mental health?
Oh look, there's
definitely a connection between the two as well
as, uh, separate issues. Um, so we have done work to
look at, um, access to addiction services,
um, which has increased in this last year, which is good.
But there's really a need to look at what are the range and types of services that
are available for people, um, and what would really make a difference.
So there's, like we did with crisis responses, having a look at what does it look
like and what does the system look like now, and what are the changes that need to
be made. I mean, that's work that we could do.
Um, we're doing some work,
a sort of evidence brief or literature scan around, um, substance
harm, so that will also inform future work.
Mm-hmm.
There, I just want to make a more broad statement in that,
we are, um, about to enter into a formal review, which was
built into the legislation, and it may be a good opportunity to have
discussions of this nature.
Thank you. Thank you.
All right.
Carlos.
Yes. I'm trying to better understand your
role. Obviously, you provide some advice to the
minister if it's required. But do you actually involve in making a
submission or contributing to some of the new legislation?
Yes.
So is alcohol-related legislation
a part of your responsibility?
When there's legislation bills
going through the process, through select committee, then we do have our
prioritization criteria. So we assess each of those
bills in terms of
the connection to the work that we're doing,
how important it is for the communities, mostly for people with lived
experience-
Mm-hmm
... and whether we've got something that we can add value to.
So that's what you've seen us a number of times presenting to you as-
Mm-hmm
... Health Select Committee on various legislation, particularly the Mental Health
Bill and others.
So we do
choose or prioritize which bills we submit on because of
the breadth of our role, we could submit on many bills, and in our
early years we did. But that meant that that
capacity wasn't available for other work.
So we have become more focused on what we submit on.
So correct me if I'm wrong, I see there's no record
of the commission actually make a submission on Sales and Supply of Alcohol
Amendment Bill
about the Easter egg business selling alcohol sales.
Is there any reason why you guys are not putting a submission in?
Or will you guys go to put a submission on the future improving
alcohol regulation bill?
Oh, I can't specifically comment on that.
I'll ask Anna if we can look for that.
We made a submission.
No, we didn't, did we?
No, I think so, no.
We can come back to you with information on that.
Yes. So sorry. When some of the legislation will be related
to alcohol addiction, and you're trying to tell me that you're not making a
submission yet. So I'm just a little bit
concerned on your role as the advisor to our government.
Yeah. Okay.
All right.
Hon. Ingrid Leary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Looking at the Mental Health Bill and looking
at your strong advocacy in June 2022, and then again, your
submission to the select committee regarding seclusion, you
stated as a body that you wanted to see us go as far
as possible to
end seclusion.
And
there wasn't agreement in this committee, and in fact,
there's going to be instead of sunsetting of seclusion, there'll be a review in
five years-
Mm-hmm
... not even in two years, which some members had asked for.
I'm curious to know, also given that our Maori are at least four times
more likely to experience seclusion, are you concerned about
what that's going to mean for New Zealand meeting its international obligations?
Are you concerned about what it means for Maori, and do you see it as
a missed opportunity?
We can live with the outcome of where the draft
is now.
What we would say is that
practice needs to change and can change.
It would be good to have the legislation behind, and we know that there are
some places that have achieved zero seclusion within New
Zealand. So it's not out of the realm of possibility. It's not an unrealistic goal.
So again, being pragmatic, we could live with the legislation.
If there's a built-in review, all the better.
But we can show that there is already
changes, and there are good examples of where we can achieve
zero or very close to it.
If we had sunsetted seclusion in the bill, that
would provide further incentives and further drive to end
the practices and change the culture of seclusion.
Yeah.
Would you agree with that?
Yes.
Supplementary.
Is that the commission's
position?
Yes.
Even if the government were to change?
I'm not sure what that means.
Will that be the commission's position even if the government-
Oh
... is to change, that the legislation
should stay
with seclusion being permitted?
Yes.
That would be our position, yeah.
Our preference is that
there is a sunset clause. We've been clear on that over the five years of our
advocacy around the Mental Health Bill.
I think what Hayden said was that we can live with it because
there are many changes that can be made in practice, and there are
some inpatient units that have eliminated seclusion.
So it is achievable
regardless of whether there is legislation or not.
The legislation helps, there's no question about that.
But this is about what happens on the ground as well.
So what would be those changes that should happen on the ground now,
given that the legislation,
we continue to-
Well, I guess what we're saying is it's possible for those changes to take place
without
having the sunset clause built into it.
But
it would obviously help, I would think, as a lever
for change if the legislation was there.
How big a priority should this
issue
be in mental health
given that you're suggesting operational changes now are the option
that remains, given that the government won't change the law?
How much should they be prioritized so that people
experiencing mental health crises
have their human rights upheld?
So we're here to amplify the voices of people with lived experience,
and they're very clear in terms of what they are seeking.
So that's our position in
terms of supporting that view.
Just wanted to give you another chance to state what your position is
on
seclusion.
Look, through a human rights lens,
having the ability to
be involved in the decisions, having support for consent, and so on
is important. So,
our position hasn't changed on that.
Okay. So you haven't modified your position-
No
... based on the government's position?
No, we haven't modified our position at all.
Natural answers.
But what we have said is that we will work,
if we can, with the sector to influence the changes that
we think can happen. In fact, it's a good idea, and we've put it back to the sector
and said to the sector itself, "You can do it.
We know what success looks like. You know what success looks like.
How can you replicate that across other parts of New Zealand?"
But it's your preference to have the bill-
Sorry.
Well, that's our position.
That's your position.
That's our stated position. Yeah.
Hamish.
Excellent.
Primary.
Thank you.
You work in a space of, I suppose, a
rich ecosystem is one way you'd probably describe it.
You've got different levels of operation, right, from
probably the statutory oversight kind of function,
through to kind of the advocacy function, where you probably share with
other organizations, maybe some NGOs, and then
probably kind of an operational lever pulling,
if I could use a colloquial term. So how do you fit
in with organizations, maybe if we start at the statutory oversight bodies like the
Health and Disability Commission, the Health Quality & Safety Commission, the
Ministry of Health.
Yeah, there's probably some others that are probably missing from this.
How do you interact with those organizations-
Yeah
... to deliver the better outcomes?
I can speak a little bit to that. So,
with the Ministry of Health,
the
Ministry of Health is both our sort of monitoring agency,
and we also have a close relationship in terms of
oversight of mental health and addiction a-across the system.
So we both have respective monitoring roles.
But there are key differences in those monitoring roles, particularly with the
commission having independent functions to
monitor the mental health and addiction system, and also across
government. In terms of some of the other entities, Health and
Disability Commissioner is an independent Crown entity,
like this commission, focused on complaints,
so individual situations, whereas this commission doesn't have
a role with individuals. It's around collective
interests of groups. So we do connect closely
with the Health and Disability Commission for those collective
insights, because they're also responding to
complaints about mental health and addiction services.
The Health Quality and Safety Commission is also a Crown entity.
Crown agents are closer to government with a role around leading and
coordinating quality improvement. They have some monitoring roles as well.
And that entity did run the National Mental Health and Addiction Quality
Improvement Program. We've had a stream about aiming for zero
seclusion. So we have worked closely with the Health Quality and Safety
Commission around those sort of
joint areas of interest. Health Quality and Safety Commission also has
the sort of sector lead around consumer invoice and
consumer engagement. We have our own internal capability
around lived experience, so there's connection points there.
So it's understanding the nature of the different agencies
and our areas of common interest, and then having those relationships
so that we keep connected with those entities.
We're a member of what's called the Quality Forum.
So that brings together all of the health entities, including the
Cancer Control Agency and others, into a
collective oversight or information sharing about
what's happening from a quality perspective.
So we keep a lot of those and hold those
government relationships in collaboration.
Excellent. Yeah, and I suppose from our point of view, it's hard to separate out
where the duplication is-
It is
... and where separate lanes are.
Yeah.
When it comes to the advocacy space, who do you see your other
like-minded organizations being?
Yeah.
I think we probably have more duplication.
That's an overview question around the monitoring
space.
Mm.
There are probably more of us monitoring.
And
I was going to say there needs to be, but
there is definitely an opportunity for us to be tighter around how we coordinate
who's doing what in the monitoring space.
And that is an active discussion that we have with both the Ministry
of Health,
and
Health New Zealand.
And in terms of the advocacy organizations,
it depends on the particular area of focus.
So for example, in relation to our work around young
people, we do have a close relationship with Mana Mokopuna and
the Children's Commissioner in that area.
We'd also keep connected with other entities, such as the
Mental Health Foundation, that also have an advocacy role.
So it's really looking at what is the particular area of focus
and who are the agencies that are also in that particular area, and
how we keep connected. Some of those entities like Mana Mokopuna have
good connections into young people, and we can
draw on some of their insights and knowledge
without having to do all of that work ourselves.
So it's really saying, "Well, which entities?
What's the topic, and who do we work with?"
And some entities pick up our work as well.
Absolutely.
Mm.
Yes.
And I suppose last up for each, yeah.
And I suppose the last kind of level, both the Ministry
of Health
holdsIn effect, and
I probably have very crudely called it pulling the levers for Health New
Zealand to change.
Mm-hmm.
How do you separate out your functions in that role as well?
And you might have probably a more technical term for
that function.
Yeah. I think most of the
action really has been sharing where we think changes
need to take place and at an operational level, understanding that we've got a
separation between governance and operations, most of that activity occurs at
an operational level, and it's often leader to leader.
And quite firm
advocacy discussions are held behind closed doors.
Mm. And so is that with the Ministry of Health or with Health New Zealand?
Both.
Yeah. We have regular engagement with the Ministry of Health, again, on the
particular areas of focus that they might be working on and that we are.
And then also with Health New Zealand and different parts of
Health New Zealand. And certainly those connections have strengthened in recent
times.
So the connections around specialist services and then also their
commissioning function and into NGOs.
So, it's quite broad engagement depending on what we're working
on and
with our particular interests. So for seclusion, for example, it's connecting more
to the specialist part of Health New Zealand.
Yeah. Thanks for that.
We've got two primaries. One from Ingrid and then Carlos.
Thank you. I'm interested to know, you've talked about being in touch with a lot of
different parts of the sector, and you did mention with
seclusion, talking to Health New Zealand, I'm thinking also about the Mental Health
Foundation and interested to know what their position would be.
But regarding workforce,
I've been talking to NCAT, to the platform
and I think the characterization would be that we've gone from a workforce that had
in a redacted document at least 1,500 vacancies
in mental health.
That was redacted out by Lester Levy.
But we know that there have been slowly filling up of some of those spaces-
Yeah
... which is a move in the right direction.
Mm-hmm.
But what work are you doing to track retention?
Because I'm thinking here about a workforce that's telling me it's highly
feminized, it's burned out. We've seen lots of people go to
Australia. They've had pay equity cuts.
It's one thing to fill jobs, it's another thing to retain them.
What is your characterization of the workforce and what work are you doing to
monitor retention and pathways to make sure that we have enough workers to
service the sector?
Probably not to the degree that you're referring to.
And I would see that as an important responsibility for an
employer to be considering in terms of their
own workforce.
We can shine the light on where service gaps occur,
and where they arise as a result of vacancies.
And you pointed out a very good example, where we've seen
access to specialist services start to lift because of vacancies
being filled. But we wouldn't probably exert a lot of
energy or effort into that space ourselves other than showing where we might see
service gaps occurring because of it.
It's difficult, though, if
somebody's doing the same job in, say, the community sector and the funding uplift
has not been the same as for direct employment from Health New Zealand.
Yeah.
So
you can say to employers you need to pay more, but if the settings-
Yeah
... aren't there from a policy perspective, that's not going to happen, is it?
Yeah.
So is that a problem?
It is a problem.
And-
And the NGO sector will tell you so.
And there's a real lack of good workforce information across the sector,
particularly in the NGO sector.
Mm-hmm.
We did some early work looking at
the proportion of the peer support workforce,
in both Health New Zealand and NGOs.
But the information about workforce and NGOs
is just not frequent enough and not granular enough,
and certainly an area that needs to improve.
It's a problem having a bit of a divided sector, isn't it?
Because you've got people doing the same jobs
but on different pay rates. You've got paucity of information.
Yeah.
From a systems level, is that something that you think
is impacting health outcomes?
In our broad view of what solutions look like, we've got a strong
focus on communities being part of the solution.
So the NGO sector, community sector is a really important part,
and particularly if we're talking about early intervention, prevention, and so
forth.
Thank you. Finally, just on psychiatry, youth
psychiatry in particular.
Mm-hmm.
I'm seeing another niche part, but very critical
part of the sector in crisis. In fact, even within
the Ministry's ranks and Health New Zealand's ranks, I think that we've seen
workforce gaps there. Are you satisfied that the government's doing enough
to resolve that high acuity end of
the workforce matrix? And what would you like to see happen around workforce
planning for that?
Well, we know it's imperfect.
Frontline staff are telling us that people are presenting
often with very high levels of acuity, where interventions
could have occurred earlier. So yeah, that is a
concern.
How we're addressing it is really basically through our own interactions
with leadership.
Which leadership?
Health New Zealand.
And so, our role is to really highlight
where the gaps are and the areas are for improvement.
Yeah.
It's then for Health New Zealand to determine, and other
agencies to determine what the solutions are and to act on those.
Are they acting on what you're saying?
LookWe have seen
response to our advice, absolutely, in
terms of, and those engagements that we have particularly
around the recent access
infographic that we released. And so that's bringing some new
insights. And so there is a process to understand what
is driving some of what we're seeing, and then what are the
actions that will actually make a difference.
So we are seeing the system shift, and we are seeing more responsiveness.
But we've still got a long way to go.
I think with some of the power of what we bring is that cross-system view.
So more than just one entity. It's looking right across the
system. And that's the space that we really think we
can add value.
Bearing in mind that our monitoring reports, we're only just beginning
to follow up on some of our earlier advice.
So as I said, this was one of the first pieces of work that we've actually gone
back to revisit and say, "If you'd like, put a scorecard on it.
How did you do?"
What, three out of the five recommendations that we made have been picked up.
Two are starting to be worked on now.
So it's early on in our cycle of following through on the advice
that we've originally given.
I'm trying to find the reference, but I
can't. But
I read recently from another sector group that
one in five, maybe it was one in four, consultant
psychiatrist positions in Health New Zealand are vacant.
Is that correct?
I don't know.
That's about a 20% vacancy rate.
Sounds about right.
We've reported on that in our reports, yes.
And that would be up to
the end of June '25.
Can you
explain further what impact your raising that in reports
has had on Health New Zealand's behavior?
I couldn't talk specifically to
Health New Zealand's behavior. There's certainly an
understanding of
those high rates of vacancies and the impact that that
has had on the ability for people to access services.
And so we have seen, particularly with the filling of
nurses and other vacancy rates in that
'24, '25 year, that has
resulted in more people being able to access those specialist
services. And that's been in conversation with Health
New Zealand.
But we're still concerned about the level of psychiatry vacancies.
Yeah.
So that is, what are the actions that are being taken through the workforce
plan and other operational activities that Health New Zealand
undertake.
So,
sorry to interrupt. I think that their workforce plan was something that we
put in as a recommendation for them to undertake, so that they've got a
longer-term view. And we've tied it in.
It's not just about filling vacancies, but it's also there's a real need
to tie it in with different ways of doing things. What are the models of delivery?
What are the models of care that go with it?
And I think those two conversations need to be hand in hand.
Indeed. There are
vacancies in other areas of the health system too.
Yeah.
How would you advise? Can you give me any
information that helps me understand the priority that should be
given to psychiatrist vacancy?
I can't
give you specifics. But I do understand that
it's an international issue, as it is for other specialties.
So we're often
competing on an international stage.
There is probably an argument, which we haven't specifically had, but there
is probably an argument for more home ground
specialist psychiatrists.
Sorry, perhaps I should just clarify.
Do you see
safety risks around this level of vacancy?
Do you see the main implication as people not
being able to receive care in a timely way but ultimately get
it and become well again? How do we assess the
impact of that level of vacancy? Because of course,
there are hard decisions to make about where resources are put.
And we certainly hear a lot through our engagement about the
impact of people not being able to access services in a timely
way. So people then presenting with a
higher level of need, more complex needs
that
take a longer timeframe in terms of
recovery for people and their whanau.
Impacts on whanau are
significant as well, particularly rangatahi and youth.
We also hear about the impacts on primary and community services,
who tell us about how they're supporting people with
higher levels of need for longer,
and that's continuing to increase.
So that has impacts both for people and also for those other
services. And when you look across the system
and say, "What is those impacts around
less access to specialist services?" It does flow right through the
system and into communities. So we definitely
hear and see that in our system monitoring work.
And it may, in fact, have an impact on why we have some
challenges around the use of coercive practices.
Yeah.
That's what I was going to say. High use of compulsory
treatment orders-
Mm-hmm
... and the ability to reduce seclusion-
... are dependent upon having
people in place who can apply their skills well.
Mm-hmm.
So isn't one of the issues that-
Many of our psychiatrists have gone to Australia.
We're competing with Australia from the same pool of countries,
and we may not have the infrastructure regarding
supervision for psychiatry or even psychology within our universities in
a planned and
in a pipeline way to be able to service our
needs. And what advice have you given, and are you
satisfied with the response? Because these are really crunchy issues that are
impacting, I would argue, even our suicide rates, and
they're urgent. So
is that the problem, and what needs to be done?
It is an-- It has been on our advice,
indeed, and we do see it as important.
And we don't see it as just a filling the vacancy issue.
When you talk about pipeline, we're talking about a
medium to long-term view before we're going to see the results.
And so it requires a sustained, clear plan, which is why we put
that to
Health New Zealand in 2024.
25.
24. So that's something we've seen as a
limiting factor on a number of solutions.
And all that goes with it, the whole, the ecosystem around
workforce development,
support,
supervision, ongoing. It's, yeah.
We also sort of heard a lot about it in terms of what happens for
particular clinical teams. So if there's a high
turnover rate or more senior and experienced staff move
on, then the team can carry a
lower caseload, need to carry a lower caseload.
They don't have as much time in terms of,
well, they need to spend more time supporting or coaching new people coming in.
There's dynamics around use of locums.
So all of that dynamic within a team means that it has
lesser sort of capacity and some capability in
terms of the people that they're then able to see.
So there is a dynamic that happens in there, and it does absolutely need to be
addressed as part of that wider picture.
It's also thinking about what are the other roles and how does the team work
together. So we're certainly a supporter of growing the peer support
workforce. We know that that workforce can make a real difference for people
as well in terms of supporting people through their journey.
So, and I would add, as well as the sort of cultural workforce, so
services that will meet people's full needs, be that for Maori, Pacific, for
Asian, whatever the population is.
Thank you. We've heard about task shifting on the committee previously. Mr.
Chair, just final sup. So to clarify, we have
heard an explanation that psychiatrist
vacancies
directly and indirectly impact timely access to
services. We've had an explanation that that may have
negative impacts on the human rights aspects of care, of use of
seclusion and compulsory
treatment orders. But
does the commission have concerns about clinical safety
as a result of this level of shortage?
Can you just elaborate on clinical safety?
Well, unsafe
mental health care can lead to people being unsafe in mental
health units or immediately on discharge, and
in some cases, that can have disastrous consequences for
those people.
I'm trying to understand your level of concern about the
understaffing and mental health care.
Well, as I said, we've got to the point that
it became a recommendation on our part
to see
a way for-- or to encourage a way forward for that-
For the reasons stated about
human rights and access to services
or safety.
Or clinical safety.
Yeah.
Or clinical safety. Is anybody able to respond to that question?
Look, we don't look at particular aspects of
clinical safety. I mean, the safety aspect that we have a focus on is around
use of seclusion and
sort of coercive practices.
There's limited information of the experience of people using
services. The agency that has the sort of the quality and safety
mandate is HQEC. So it's a conversation that we
have with HQEC to understand,
in HDC, what might some of those clinical safety concerns have been raised.
So you do have that conversation?
We do through the quality forum. So some of those conversations are early
conversations. I think,
yeah, this is something that's worth us having a closer look at.
But finally-
I think I'm taking away from this a question about clinical governance.
But-
And also at the beginning, I asked about accountability in the health
system, and you've now mentioned other organizations.
And equally, when we talk to them, they mention you.
Yes.
Doesn't this highlight-
Yeah
... the leadership gap and how we manage
to shift the dial on some of these critical issues so that it becomes
more than a conversation or more than recommendations?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Agree.
All right. This is our last round.
Just trying to do a little bit of positive.
We're talking about vacancy rate just now.
We look at the data, we know that the vacancy rate is peaking
around 2022 to '23 at over
11%, but actually saw the sign of improvement in the
late of 2024 and '25-
Yeah
... to just under 10%. I think there's a huge improvement.
Mm-hmm.
But what I want to say is, because we also know that one of the target you
achieve is to train more than 500 professional,
and I think you achieved that target.
That's the minister's target, I believe.
Yes. So for those over 500 professional being
trained, who are they? What role are they?
Are they psychologists or support worker?
And how that actually improve the vacancy rate in the future?
Anybody going to handle on it?
Not specifically. I mean, it's the minister's target.
It's the minister's action plan through Health New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
So we've
obviously aware of it-
Mm-hmm
... but I haven't, yeah, I couldn't comment at this point in time on the
breakdown of those workforces.
Okay.
That information is available.
Sure.
Yeah, I just haven't got it in my head.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, if I may, before we close off, I just think it'd be important
that we acknowledge Hayden Wano. I think it might be your last time
before the committee in your role, Mental Health Commission.
So-
Yeah
... after six or seven years of tireless work, I just think it's
important that we acknowledge your contribution and-
Thank you anyway.
Well done, Ingrid. Thank you very much.
Yes.
Thank you to all of you for presenting in front of us.